HEALTH PERCEPTION-HEALTH MANAGEMENT PATTERN
Health maintenance, ineffective 275–278
Therapeutic regimen: effective management 517–519
Therapeutic regimen: ineffective management
Therapeutic regimen: readiness for enhanced management 525–527
Therapeutic regimen: family, ineffective management 520–522
Therapeutic regimen: community, ineffective management
Noncompliance (specify) 343–347
Health-seeking behaviors (specify) 278–281
Energy field, disturbed 208–211
Falls, risk for
Infection, risk for
Injury (trauma), risk for 310–313
Protection, ineffective 411–412
Poisoning, risk for 393–396
Suffocation, risk for 500–503
Perioperative positioning injury, risk for 313–316
Sudden infant death syndrome 185–189 NUTRITIONAL-METABOLIC PATTERN
Nutrition: more than body requirements, imbalanced 352–355
Nutrition: more than body requirements, risk for imbalanced 356–358
Nutrition: less than body requirements, imbalanced 347–352
Nutrition, readiness for enhanced 359–362
Breastfeeding, ineffective
Breastfeeding, effective 108–110
Breastfeeding, interrupted 115–117
Infant feeding pattern, ineffective
Aspiration, risk for 86–89
Swallowing, impaired 510–515
Nausea
Oral mucous membrane, impaired 362–365
Dentition, impaired 191–194
Fluid balance, readiness for enhanced 239–242
Fluid volume imbalance, risk for 254–256
Fluid volume, risk for deficient
Fluid volume, deficient
Fluid volume, excess 249–252
Skin integrity, impaired 461–465
Skin integrity, risk for impaired 465–468
Tissue integrity (specify type), impaired 533–537
Body temperature, risk for imbalanced 102–104
Latex allergy response
73–75
Latex allergy response, risk for
Thermoregulation, ineffective
Hyperthermia
Hypothermia 291–295
Failure to thrive, adult 214–217 ELIMINATION PATTERN
Constipation 153–157
Constipation, risk for
Constipation, perceived 157–159
Diarrhea
197–200
Bowel incontinence
Urinary elimination, impaired 554–558 *Reprinted from Manual of Nursing Diagnosis, 10th ed., M. Gordon, Copyright 2002, with Urinary elimination, readiness for enhanced 558–561
Urinary incontinence, functional
Urinary incontinence, reflex 564–566
Urinary incontinence, stress 567–569
Urinary incontinence, urge 572–575
Urinary urge incontinence, risk for 576–578
Incontinence, total
Urinary retention 578–581 ACTIVITY-EXERCISE PATTERN
Activity intolerance, risk for 60–63
Activity intolerance (specify level) 63–65
Adaptive capacity, decreased, intracranial 316–319
Infant behavior, disorganized 295–301
Infant behavior, risk for disorganized 303–304
Infant behavior, readiness for enhanced organized 301–303
Fatigue
Physical mobility, impaired 333–337
Bed mobility, impaired 331–333
Walking, impaired 597–599
Wheelchair mobility, impaired 337–339
Transfer ability, impaired 544–546
Development, risk for delayed 194–197
Autonomic dysreflexia 92–95
Autonomic dysreflexia, risk for 95–97
Disuse syndrome, risk for 200–205
Self-care deficit (specify: bathing/hygiene, dressing/grooming, feeding, toileting) Diversional activity deficient 205–208
Home maintenance, impaired 281–283
Dysfunctional ventilatory weaning response
Ventilation, impaired spontaneous
Airway clearance, ineffective
Breathing pattern, ineffective 117–121
Gas exchange, impaired 256–260
Cardiac output, decreased 121–126
Tissue perfusion, alteration (specify) 537–544
Peripheral neurovascular dysfunction, risk for 387–390
Surgical recovery, delayed 507–510
Growth and development, delayed 266–271
Growth, risk for disproportionate 271–275
Wandering SLEEP-REST PATTERN
Sleep-pattern disturbed 472–477
Sleep deprivation 468–472
Sleep, readiness for enhanced 477–480 COGNITIVE-PERCEPTUAL PATTERN
Acute pain 365–369
Chronic pain 370–374
Sensory perception, disturbed (specify) 449–454
Unilateral neglect
Knowledge deficit (specify) 319–323
Knowledge, readiness for enhanced 323–325
Memory, impaired 328–331
Thought processes, disturbed 529–533
Acute confusion 147–150
Chronic confusion 150–153
Environmental interpretation syndrome, impaired 211–214
Decisional conflict (specify) Anxiety, death 83–86
Hopelessness
Powerlessness
Powerlessness, risk for
Loneliness, risk for
Self-concept, readiness for enhanced 430–433
Chronic low self-esteem 433–437
Situational low self-esteem 437–440
Situational low self-esteem, risk for 440–441
Body image disturbed 98–102
Personal identity disturbed 390–393
Violence, risk for self-directed 591–596 ROLE-RELATIONSHIP PATTERN
Anticipatory grieving 260–263
Dysfunctional grieving 263–266
Chronic sorrow 487–489
Role performance, ineffective 422–425
Social isolation 484–487
Impaired social interaction 480–484
Relocation stress syndrome 417–420
Relocation stress syndrome, risk for
Family processes, interrupted 225–228
Family processes, readiness for enhanced 228–232
Dysfunctional family processes: alcoholism 221–225
Impaired parenting, risk for 385–387
Impaired parenting
Parenting, readiness for enhanced 381–385
Impaired parent/infant/child attachment, risk for 89–92
Parental role conflict
374–377
Caregiver role strain 126–132
Caregiver role strain, risk for 132–135
Impaired verbal communication 135–139
Communication, readiness for enhanced 139–143
Risk for violence, directed at others 590–591 SEXUALITY-REPRODUCTIVE
Sexual dysfunction 454–458
Ineffective sexuality patterns
Rape-trauma syndrome 412–417
Rape-trauma syndrome: compound reaction 413
Rape-trauma syndrome: silent reaction 413 COPING-STRESS TOLERANCE PATTERN
Ineffective coping
Coping, readiness for enhanced 182–185
Defensive coping 166–169
Community coping, ineffective 162–164
Community coping, readiness for enhanced 164–166
Ineffective denial
Impaired adjustment 66–69
Post-trauma syndrome 396–401
Post-trauma syndrome, risk for 402–404
Family coping: readiness for enhanced 175–177
Ineffective family coping: compromised 169–172
Ineffective family coping: disabling 172–175
503–507
Risk for suicide
Self-mutilation 442–445
Self-mutilation, risk for VALUE-BELIEF PATTERN
Spiritual distress
490–494
Spiritual distress, risk for 494–497
Spiritual well-being, readiness for enhanced 497–500 Clinical Specialist—Adult Psychiatric/Mental Health, Retired
Adjunct Faculty
Beth-El College of Nursing and Health Sciences CU-Springs
Colorado Springs, Colorado Nurse Consultant
TNT-RN Enterprises
Adjunct Faculty
Pikes Peak Community College
Colorado Springs, Colorado F.A. Davis Company
1915 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
www. fadavis.com Copyright  ©  1985, 1988, 1991, 1993, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002  by  F.A.
Davis Company. All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright.
No part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or trans-
mitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means, electronic, mechanical, photo-
copying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the
publisher. Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 As new scientific information becomes available through basic and clin-
ical  research, recommended  treatments  and  drug  therapies  undergo
changes. The author(s) and publisher have done everything possible to
make this book accurate, up to date, and in accord with accepted stan-
dards at the time of publication. The authors, editors, and publisher are
not responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from appli-
cation  of the  book, and  make  no  warranty, expressed  or  implied, in
regard to the contents of the book. Any practice described in this book
should be applied by the reader in accordance with professional stan-
dards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply
in each situation. The reader is advised always to check product infor-
mation  (package  inserts)  for  changes  and  new  information  regarding
dose and contraindications before administering any drug. Caution is
especially urged when using new or infrequently ordered drugs. Authorization  to  photocopy  items  for  internal  or  personal  use, or  the
internal  or  personal  use  of specific  clients, is  granted  by  F.A. Davis
Company  for  users  registered  with  the  Copyright  Clearance  Center
(CCC)  Transactional  Reporting  Service, provided  that  the  fee  of $.10
per  copy  is  paid  directly  to  CCC, 222  Rosewood  Drive, Danvers, MA
01923. For  those  organizations  that  have  been  granted  a  photocopy
license  by  CCC, a  separate  system  of payment  has  been  arranged.
The fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is: 8036-
0948/02 0 + $.10. Sheila Marquez
Executive Director
Vice President/Chief Operating Officer
The Colorado SIDS Program, Inc.
Denver, Colorado Our  families, who  helped  with  the  mundane  activities  of
daily living that allowed us to write this book and who provide
us with love and encouragement in all our endeavors. Our friends, who support us in our writing, put up with our Bob  Martone, Publisher, Nursing, who  asks  questions  that
stimulate  thought  and  discussion, and  who  maintains  good
humor throughout. The F.A. Davis production staff, who coordinated and expe-
dited the project through the printing process, meeting unreal
deadlines, and sending pages to us with bated breath. And last and most important:
The nurses we are writing for, to those who have found the
previous  editions  of the  Pocket  Guide  helpful, and  to  other
nurses who are looking for help to provide quality nursing care
in a period of transition and change, we say, “Nursing Diagnosis
is the way.” A special acknowledgment to Marilynn’s friend, the late Diane
Camillone, who  provoked  an  awareness  of the  role  of the
patient  and  continues  to  influence  our  thoughts  about  the
importance  of quality  nursing  care, and  to  our  late  colleague,
Mary Jeffries, who introduced us to nursing diagnosis. To our colleagues in NANDA who continue to formulate and
refine  nursing  diagnoses  to  provide  nursing  with  the  tools  to
enhance and promote the growth of the profession. Health Conditions and Client Concerns with Associated Nursing
Diagnoses appear on pages 603-720. Putting Theory into Practice: Sample
Assessment Tools, Plan of Care,
and Documentation ................................................................12 Adult Medical/Surgical Assessment Tool 16
Excerpt from Psychiatric Assessment Tool
Excerpt from Prenatal Assessment Tool
Excerpt from Intrapartal Assessment Tool SECTION 2
Diagnostic Divisions: Nursing Diagnoses
Organized According to a Nursing Focus ..........................33 For each nursing diagnosis, the following information is provided:
Taxonomy II, Domain, Class, Code, Year Submitted Subjective/Objective
Desired Outcomes/Evaluation Criteria
Actions/Interventions
Nursing Priorities
Documentation Focus
Sample Nursing Outcomes & Interventions Classifications The  American  Nurses  Association  (ANA)  Social  Policy
Statement of 1980 was the first to define nursing as the diagno-
sis  and  treatment  of human  responses  to  actual  and  potential
health problems. This definition, when combined with the ANA
Standards of Practice, has provided impetus and support for the
use  of nursing  diagnosis. Defining  nursing  and  its  effect  on
client care supports the growing awareness that nursing care is
a key factor in client survival and in the maintenance, rehabili-
tative, and  preventive  aspects  of healthcare. Changes  and  new
developments  in  healthcare  delivery  in  the  last  decade  have
given rise to the need for a common framework of communica-
tion to ensure continuity of care for the client moving between
multiple  healthcare  settings  and  providers. Evaluation  and
documentation of care are important parts of this process. This  book  is  designed  to  aid  the  practitioner  and  student
nurse  in  identifying  interventions  commonly  associated  with
specific  nursing  diagnoses  as  proposed  by  NANDA  Inter-
national  (formerly  the  North  American  Nursing  Diagnosis
Association). These  interventions  are  the  activities  needed  to
implement  and  document  care  provided  to  the  individual
client and can be used in varied settings from acute to commu-
nity/home care. Chapters  1  and  2  present  brief discussions  of the  nursing
process, data collection, and care plan construction. Chapter 3
contains  the  Diagnostic  Divisions, Assessment  Tool, a  sample
plan of care, and corresponding documentation/charting exam-
ples. For more in-depth information and inclusive plans of care
related to specific medical/psychiatric conditions (with ration-
ale and the application of the diagnoses), the nurse is referred
to  the  larger  works, all  published  by  the  F.A. Davis  Company:
Nursing  Care  Plans:  Guidelines  for  Planning  and  Documenting
Patient Care, ed. 6 (Doenges, Moorhouse, Geissler-Murr, 2002);
Psychiatric Care Plans: Guidelines for Planning and Documenting
Client Care, ed. 3 (Doenges, Townsend, Moorhouse, 1998); and
Maternal/Newborn  Plans  of Care:  Guidelines  for  Planning  and
Documenting Client Care, ed. 3 (Doenges, Moorhouse, 1999). Nursing  diagnoses  are  listed  alphabetically  in  Chapter  4  for
ease of reference and include the diagnoses accepted for use by NANDA  through  2003. Each  approved  diagnosis  includes  its
definition and information divided into the NANDA categories
of Related  or  Risk  Factors  and  Defining  Characteristics.
information  reflects  causative  or
Related/Risk  Factors 
contributing factors that can be useful for determining whether
the  diagnosis  is  applicable  to  a  particular  client. Defining
Characteristics  (signs  and  symptoms  or  cues)  are  listed  as
subjective and/or objective and are used to confirm actual diag-
noses, aid in formulating outcomes, and provide additional data
for  choosing  appropriate  interventions. The  authors  have  not
deleted or altered NANDA’s listings; however, on occasion, they
have added to their definitions and suggested additional criteria
to  provide  clarification  and  direction. These  additions  are
denoted with brackets [   ]. With  the  development  and  acceptance  of Taxonomy  II
following  the  biennial  conference  in  2000, significant  changes
were made to better reflect the content of the diagnoses within
the taxonomy. It is designed to reduce miscalculations, errors,
and redundancies. The framework has been changed from the
Human  Response  Patterns  and  is  organized  in  Domains  only
and  Classes, with  13  domains, 105  classes, and  167  diagnoses.
Although clinicians will use the actual diagnoses, understanding
the taxonomic structure will help the nurse to find the desired
information quickly. Taxonomy II is designed to be multiaxial
with 7 axes (see Appendix 2). An axis is defined as a dimension
of the  human  response  that  is  considered  in  the  diagnostic
process. Sometimes  an  axis  may  be  included  in  the  diagnostic
concept, such  as  ineffective  community  coping  in  which  the
unit of care (e.g., community) is named. Some are implicit, such
as activity intolerance in which the individual is the unit of care.
Sometimes an axis may not be pertinent to a particular diagno-
sis and will not be a part of the nursing diagnosis label or code.
For example, the time axis may not be relevant to each diagnos-
tic situation. The Taxonomic Domain and Class are noted under
each nursing diagnosis heading. An Axis 6 descriptor is included
in each nursing diagnosis label. in  conjunction  with  NANDA, proposed  that
specific  nursing  diagnoses  currently  approved  and  structured
according  to  Taxonomy  I  Revised  be  included  in  the  Inter-
national  Classification  of Diseases  (ICD)  within  the  section
“Family  of Health-Related  Classifications.” While  the  World
Health Organization did not accept this initial proposal because
of lack of documentation of the usefulness of nursing diagnoses
at the international level, the NANDA list has been accepted by
SNOMED  (Systemized  Nomenclature  of Medicine)  for  inclu-
sion  in  its  international  coding  system  and  is  included  in  the
Unified  Medical  Language  System  of the  National  Library  of H O W   T O   U S E   T H E   N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Medicine. Today, researchers from around the world are validat-
ing nursing diagnoses in support for resubmission and accep-
tance in future additions of ICD. The  authors  have  chosen  to  categorize  the  list  of nursing
diagnoses approved for clinical use and testing into Diagnostic
Divisions, which  is  the  framework  for  an  assessment  tool
(Chapter  3)  designed  to  assist  the  nurse  to  readily  identify  an
appropriate  nursing  diagnosis  from  data  collected  during  the
assessment  process. The  Diagnostic  Division  label  is  included
following  the  Taxonomic  label  under  each  nursing  diagnosis
heading. Desired Outcomes/Evaluation Criteria are identified to assist
the  nurse  in  formulating  individual  client  outcomes  and  to
support the evaluation process. Interventions  in  this  pocket  guide  are  primarily  directed  to
adult  care  settings  (although  general  age  span  considerations
are  included)  and  are  listed  according  to  nursing  priorities.
Some  interventions  require  collaborative  or  interdependent
orders  (e.g., medical, psychiatric), and  the  nurse  will  need  to
determine  when  this  is  necessary  and  take  the  appropriate
action. Although all defining characteristics are listed, interven-
tions that address specialty areas outside the scope of this book
are  not  routinely  presented  (e.g., obstetrics/gynecology/pedi-
atrics)  except  for  diagnoses  that  are  infancy-oriented, such  as
Breastfeeding, ineffective; Infant  Behavior, disorganized; and
Parent/Infant/Child  Attachment, risk  for  impaired. For  exam-
ple, when addressing deficient Fluid Volume, isotonic (hemor-
rhage), the nurse is directed to stop blood loss; however, specific
direction to perform fundal massage is not listed. The  inclusion  of Documentation  Focus  suggestions  is  to
remind the nurse of the importance and necessity of recording
the steps of the nursing process. Finally, in  recognition  of the  ongoing  work  of numerous
researchers over the past 15 years, the authors have referenced
the  Nursing  Interventions  and  Outcomes  labels  developed  by
the  Iowa  Intervention  Projects  (Bulechek  &  McCloskey;
Johnson, Mass, & Moorhead). These groups have been classify-
ing  nursing  interventions  and  outcomes  to  predict  resource
requirements  and  measure  outcomes, thereby  meeting  the
needs  of a  standardized  language  that  can  be  coded  for
computer and reimbursement purposes. As an introduction to
this work in progress, sample NIC and NOC labels have been
included  under  the  heading  Sample  Nursing  Interventions  &
Outcomes  Classifications  at  the  conclusion  of each  nursing
diagnosis section. The reader is referred to the various publica-
tions by Joanne C. McCloskey and Marion Johnson for more in-
depth information. H O W   T O   U S E   T H E   N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Chapter  5  presents  over  400  disorders/health  conditions
reflecting all specialty areas, with associated nursing diagnoses
written as client diagnostic statements that include the “related
to” and “evidenced by” components. This section will facilitate
and help validate the assessment and problem/need identifica-
tion steps of the nursing process. As noted, with few exceptions, we have presented NANDA’s
recommendations  as  formulated. We  support  the  belief that
practicing nurses and researchers need to study, use, and evalu-
ate the diagnoses as presented. Nurses can be creative as they use
the standardized language, redefining and sharing information
as the diagnoses are used with individual patients. As new nurs-
ing diagnoses are developed, it is important that the data they
encompass  are  added  to  the  current  database. As  part  of the
process by clinicians, educators, and researchers across practice
specialties and academic settings to define, test, and refine nurs-
ing diagnosis, nurses are encouraged to share insights and ideas
with NANDA at the following address: NANDA International,
1211  Locust  Street, Philadelphia, PA  19107, USA; e-mail:
nanda@rmpinc.com. H O W   T O   U S E   T H E   N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Many years ago, the nursing profession identified a problem-
solving process that “combines the most desirable elements of
the  art  of nursing  with  the  most  relevant  elements  of systems
theory, using  the  scientific  method” (Shore, 1988). The  term
nursing  process was  introduced  in  the  1950s  and  has  gained
national acceptance as the basis for providing effective nursing
care. It is now included in the conceptual framework of all nurs-
ing curricula and is accepted in the legal definition of nursing in
the  nurse  practice  acts  of most  states. This  nursing  process  is
central to nursing actions in any setting, because it is an efficient
method  of organizing  thought  processes  for  clinical  decision
making and problem solving. Use  of the  nursing  process  requires  the  skills  of (1)  assess-
ment (systematic collection of data relating to clients and their
needs), (2)  problem/need  identification  (analysis  of data), (3)
planning  (setting  goals, choice  of solutions), (4)  implementa-
tion (putting the plan into action), and (5) evaluation (assess-
ing  the  effectiveness  of the  plan  and  changing  the  plan  as
indicated  by  the  current  needs). Although  these  skills  are
presented as separate, individual activities, they are interrelated
and form a continuous circle of thought and action. To use this process, the nurse must demonstrate fundamental
abilities  of knowledge, creativity, adaptability, commitment,
trust, and leadership. In addition, intelligence and interpersonal
and technical skills are important. Because decision making is
crucial  to  each  step  of the  process, the  following  assumptions
are important for the nurse to consider: • The client is a human being who has worth and dignity.
• There are basic human needs that must be met, and when
they  are  not, problems  arise, requiring  interventions  by
another  person  until  and  if the  individual  can  resume
responsibility for self. • The  client  has  a  right  to  quality  health  and  nursing  care
delivered  with  interest, compassion, competence, and  a
focus on wellness and prevention of illness. Nurses have struggled for years to define nursing by identi-
fying  the  parameters  of nursing  with  the  goal  of attaining professional  status. To  this  end, nurses  meet, discuss, and
conduct  research  (in  both  the  national  and  international
arenas) to identify and label client problems and responses that
fall within the scope of nursing practice. Changes in healthcare
delivery  and  reimbursement  methods, the  advent  of health
maintenance organizations (HMOs), and alternative healthcare
settings  (home  health, extended-care  facilities, and  the  like)
continue to increase the need for a commonality of communi-
cation  to  ensure  continuity  of care  for  the  client  who  moves
from one setting/area to another. Evaluation and improvement
of provided services are an important part of this process, and
both  providers  and  users  of care  benefit  from  accurate  docu-
mentation of the care provided and the client’s response. The  use  of nursing  diagnosis  (ND)  provides  nurses  with  a
common  language  for  identifying  client  needs, aids  in  the
choice of nursing interventions, and provides guidance for eval-
uation. It  promotes  improved  communication  among  nurses,
shifts, units, other  healthcare  providers, and  alternative  care
settings. This  language  further  provides  a  base  for  clinicians,
educators, and  researchers  to  document, validate, and/or  alter
the  process. The  American  Nurses  Association  (ANA)  Social
Policy  Statements  (1980/1995)  and  the  ANA  Standards  of
Practice  (1973/1991)  have  provided  impetus  and  support  for
the use of nursing diagnosis in the practice setting. Currently, there are differing definitions of nursing diagno-
sis. NANDA  International  (formerly  The  North  American
Nursing  Diagnosis  Association)  has  accepted  the  following
definition: Nursing diagnosis is a clinical judgment about individ-
ual, family, or community responses to actual and poten-
tial  health  problems/life  processes. Nursing  diagnoses
provide the basis for selection of nursing interventions to
achieve outcomes for which the nurse is accountable. Although  it  continues  to  evolve, the  current  NANDA  list
provides diagnostic labels and information for appropriate use.
Nurses  need  to  become  familiar  with  the  parameters  of the
diagnoses, identifying strengths and weaknesses, thus promot-
ing research and further development. Although nursing prac-
tice  is  more  than  nursing  diagnosis, the  use  of standardized
nursing language can help to define and to refine the profession.
Also, NDs can be used within many existing conceptual frame-
works because they are a generic approach adaptable to all. Whereas nursing actions were once based on variables such as
signs  and  symptoms, diagnostic  tests, and  medical  diagnoses,
NDs  are  a  uniform  way  of identifying, focusing  on, and  deal-
ing  with  specific  client  problems/needs. The  accurate  nursing N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E diagnosis  of a  client  need  can  set  a  standard  for  nursing
practice, thus leading to improved care delivery. Nursing and medicine are interrelated and have implications
for each other. This interrelationship includes the exchange of
data, the  sharing  of ideas/thinking, and  the  development  of
plans  of care  that  include  all  data  pertinent  to  the  individual
client  as  well  as  the  family/significant  other(s)  (SO[s]). This
relationship also extends to all disciplines that have contact with
the individual/family. Although nurses work within the medical
and  psychosocial  domains, nursing’s  phenomena  of concern
are  the  patterns  of human  response, not  disease  processes.
Therefore, nursing diagnoses usually do not parallel or mimic
medical/psychiatric  diagnoses  but  do  involve  independent
nursing  activities  as  well  as  collaborative  roles  and  actions.
Thus, the  written  plan  of care  contains  more  than  actions
initiated  by  medical  orders. It  contains  a  combination  of the
orders  and  plans  of care  of all  involved  disciplines. The  nurse
is responsible for seeing that these different activities are pulled
together into a functional plan to provide holistic care for the
individual/family. In  using  ND  as  an  integral  part  of the  nursing  process, the
nursing  profession  has  identified  a  body  of knowledge  that
contributes to the prevention of illness as well as to the mainte-
nance  and/or  restoration  of health  (or  relief of pain  and
discomfort when a return to health is not possible). Because the
nursing  process  is  the  basis  of all  nursing  actions, it  is  the
essence  of nursing. The  process  is  flexible  and  yet  sufficiently
structured so as to provide the base for nursing actions. It can
be applied in any healthcare or educational setting, in any theo-
retical or conceptual framework, and within the context of any
nursing philosophy. Subsequent chapters help the nurse apply the nursing process
to  become  more  familiar  with  the  current  NANDA-approved
list of NDs, their definitions, related/risk factors (etiology), and
defining characteristics. Coupled with desired outcomes and the
most commonly used interventions, the nurse can write, imple-
ment, and document an individualized plan of care. T H E   N U R S I N G   P R O C E S S Because  of their  hectic  schedules, many  nurses  believe  that
time spent writing plans of care is time taken away from client
care. Plans  of care  have  been  viewed  as “busy  work” to  satisfy
accreditation requirements or the whims of supervisors. In real-
ity, however, quality  client  care  must  be  planned  and  coordi-
nated. Properly  written  and  used  plans  of care  can  provide
direction and continuity of care by facilitating communication
among  nurses  and  other  caregivers. They  also  provide  guide-
lines  for  documentation  and  a  tool  for  evaluating  the  care
provided. The components of a plan of care are based on the nursing
process. Creating  a  plan  of care  begins  with  the  collection  of
data (assessment). The client database consists of subjective and
objective  information  encompassing  the  various  concerns
reflected  in  the  current  NANDA  International  (formerly  the
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association) list of nursing
diagnoses (NDs) (Table 2–1). Subjective data are those that are
reported by the client (and SOs) in the individual’s own words.
This  information  includes  the  individual’s  perceptions  and
what he or she wants to share. It is important to accept what is
reported because the client is the “expert” in this area. Objective
data are those that are observed or described (quantitatively or
qualitatively) and include diagnostic testing and physical exam-
ination findings. Analysis of the collected data leads to the iden-
tification of problems or areas of concern/need. These problems
or needs are expressed as NDs. A nursing diagnosis is a decision about a need/problem that
requires nursing intervention and management. The need may
be anything that interferes with the quality of life the client is
used to and/or desires. It includes concerns of the client, SOs,
and/or nurse. The ND focuses attention on a physical or behav-
ioral  response, either  a  current  need  or  a  problem  at  risk  for
developing. When the ND label is combined with the individ-
ual’s specific related/risk factors and defining characteristics (as
appropriate), a  client  diagnostic  statement  is  created. This
provides  direction  for  nursing  care, and  its  affective  tone  can Activity Intolerance [specify level]
Activity Intolerance, risk for
Adjustment, impaired 66–69
Airway Clearance, ineffective 69–72
Allergy Response, latex 73–75
Allergy Response, risk for latex 76–78
Anxiety [specify level]
Anxiety, death 83–86
Aspiration, risk for 86–89
Attachment, risk for impaired parent/infant/child 89–92
Autonomic Dysreflexia 92–95
Autonomic Dysreflexia, risk for 95–97 Body Image, disturbed 98–102
Body Temperature, risk for imbalanced 102–104
Bowel Incontinence
Breastfeeding, effective 108–110
Breastfeeding, ineffective
Breastfeeding, interrupted 115–117
Breathing Pattern, ineffective 117–121 Cardiac Output, decreased 121–126
Caregiver Role Strain 126–132
Caregiver Role Strain, risk for 132–135
Communication, impaired verbal
*Communication, readiness for enhanced 139–143
Conflict, decisional (specify) 144–147
Confusion, acute 147–150
Confusion, chronic 150–153
Constipation 153–157
Constipation, perceived 157–159
Constipation, risk for
Coping, community: ineffective
Coping, community: readiness for enhanced 164–166
Coping, defensive 166–169
Coping, family: compromised 169–172
Coping, family: disabled 172–175
Coping, family: readiness for enhanced 175–177
Coping, ineffective
178–182
*Coping, readiness for enhanced 182–185 *New to the 2nd NANDA/NIC/NOC (NNN) Conference.
Information that appears in brackets has been added by the authors A P P L I C AT I O N   O F   T H E   N U R S I N G   P R O C E S S Death Syndrome, risk for sudden infant 185–189
Denial, ineffective 189–191
Dentition, impaired 191–194
Development, risk for delayed 194–197
Diarrhea 197–200
Disuse Syndrome, risk for 200–205
Diversional Activity, deficient 205–208 Failure to Thrive, adult 214–217
Falls, risk for 217–221
Family Processes, dysfunctional: alcoholism 221–225
Family Processes, interrupted 225–228
*Family Processes, readiness for enhanced 228–232
Fatigue 232–236
Fear
*Fluid Balance, readiness for enhanced 239–242
[Fluid Volume, deficient hyper/hypotonic]
Fluid Volume, deficient [isotonic]
Fluid Volume, excess 249–252
Fluid Volume, risk for deficient
Fluid Volume, risk for imbalanced 254–256 Gas Exchange, impaired 256–260
Grieving, anticipatory 260–263
Grieving, dysfunctional
Growth and Development, delayed 266–271
Growth, risk for disproportionate 271–275 Health Maintenance, ineffective 275–278
Health-Seeking Behaviors (specify) 278–281
Home Maintenance, impaired 281–283
Hopelessness
Hyperthermia 287–290
Hypothermia Infant Behavior, disorganized 295–301
Infant Behavior, readiness for enhanced organized 301–303
Infant Behavior, risk for disorganized 303–304
Infant Feeding Pattern, ineffective 304–306 *New to the 2nd NANDA/NIC/NOC (NNN) Conference.
Information that appears in brackets has been added by the authors N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Infection, risk for 307–310
Injury, risk for
Injury, risk for perioperative positioning 313–316
Intracranial Adaptive Capacity, decreased 316–319 Knowledge, deficient [Learning Need] (specify)
*Knowledge (specify), readiness for enhanced 323–325 Memory, impaired 328–331
Mobility, impaired bed 331–333
Mobility, impaired physical 333–337
Mobility, impaired wheelchair 337–339 Noncompliance [Adherence, ineffective] [specify] 343–347
Nutrition: imbalanced, less than body requirements
Nutrition: imbalanced, more than body requirements 352–355
Nutrition: imbalanced, risk for more than body requirements Pain, acute 365–369
Pain, chronic 370–374
Parental Role Conflict
Parenting, impaired 377–381
*Parenting, readiness for enhanced 381–385
Parenting, risk for impaired 385–387
Peripheral Neurovascular Dysfunction, risk for 387–390
Personal Identity, disturbed 390–393
Poisoning, risk for 393–396
Post-Trauma Syndrome [specify stage] 396–401
Post-Trauma Syndrome, risk for 402–404
Powerlessness [specify level]
Powerlessness, risk for
408–410
Protection, ineffective 411–412 *New to the 2nd NANDA/NIC/NOC (NNN) Conference.
Information that appears in brackets has been added by the authors A P P L I C AT I O N   O F   T H E   N U R S I N G   P R O C E S S Rape-Trauma Syndrome: silent reaction 413
Relocation Stress Syndrome 417–420
Relocation Stress Syndrome, risk for 421–422
Role Performance, ineffective 422–425 Self-Care Deficit: bathing/hygiene 425–430
Self-Care Deficit: dressing/grooming
Self-Care Deficit: feeding
Self-Care Deficit: toileting
*Self-Concept, readiness for enhanced 430–433
Self-Esteem, chronic low 433–437
Self-Esteem, situational low 437–440
Self-Esteem, risk for situational low 440–441
Self-Mutilation 442–445
Self-Mutilation, risk for
Sensory Perception, disturbed (specify: visual, auditory, kinesthetic, Sexual Dysfunction 454–458
Sexuality Pattern, ineffective 458–461
Skin Integrity, impaired 461–465
Skin Integrity, risk for impaired 465–468
Sleep Deprivation 468–472
Sleep Pattern, disturbed 472–477
*Sleep, readiness for enhanced 477–480
Social Interaction, impaired 480–484
Social Isolation 484–487
Sorrow, chronic 487–489 Suffocation, risk for 500–503
Suicide, risk for 503–507
Surgical Recovery, delayed 507–510
Swallowing, impaired 510–515 Therapeutic Regimen Management: community, ineffective
Therapeutic Regimen Management: effective 517–519
Therapeutic Regimen Management: family, ineffective 520–522
Therapeutic Regimen Management: ineffective
*Therapeutic Regimen Management: readiness for enhanced *New to the 2nd NANDA/NIC/NOC (NNN) Conference.
Please  also  see  the  NANDA  diagnoses  grouped  according  to N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Tissue Integrity, impaired 533–537
Tissue Perfusion, ineffective (specify type: renal, cerebral, cardiopul- Unilateral Neglect
Urinary Elimination, impaired 554–558
*Urinary Elimination, readiness for enhanced 558–561
Urinary Incontinence, functional
Urinary Incontinence, reflex 564–566
Urinary Incontinence, stress 567–569
Urinary Incontinence, total
570–572
Urinary Incontinence, urge 572–575
Urinary Incontinence, risk for urge 576–578
Urinary Retention [acute/chronic] 578–581 Ventilation, impaired spontaneous
581–586
Ventilatory Weaning Response, dysfunctional
Violence, [actual/] risk for other-directed 590–591
Violence, [actual/] risk for self-directed 591–596 *New to the 2nd NANDA/NIC/NOC (NNN) Conference.
Information that appears in brackets has been added by the authors A P P L I C AT I O N   O F   T H E   N U R S I N G   P R O C E S S shape expectations of the client’s response and/or influence the
nurse’s behavior toward the client. The  key  to  accurate  diagnosis  is  collection  and  analysis  of
data. In Chapter 3, the NDs have been categorized into divisions
(Diagnostic Divisions: Nursing Diagnoses Organized According
to a Nursing Focus, Section 2) and an assessment tool designed
to assist the nurse to identify appropriate NDs as the data are
collected. Nurses may feel at risk in committing themselves to
documenting a nursing diagnosis for fear they might be wrong.
However, unlike  medical  diagnoses, NDs  can  change  as  the
client  progresses  through  various  stages  of illness/maladapta-
tion to resolution of the condition/situation. Desired outcomes are formulated to give direction to, as well
as to evaluate, the care provided. These outcomes emerge from
the  diagnostic  statement  and  are  what  the  client  hopes  to
achieve. They serve as the guidelines to evaluate progress toward
resolution  of needs/problems, providing  impetus  for  revising
the  plan  as  appropriate. In  this  book, outcomes  are  stated  in
general terms to permit the practitioner to individualize them
by adding timelines and other data according to specific client
circumstances. Outcome terminology needs to be concise, real-
istic, measurable, and stated in words the client can understand.
Beginning the outcome statement with an action verb provides
measurable  direction, for  example, “Verbalizes  relationship
between diabetes mellitus and circulatory changes in feet within
2  days” or  “Correctly  performs  procedure  of home  glucose
monitoring within 48 hours.” Interventions  are  the  action  steps  taken  to  achieve  desired
outcomes and, because they are communicated to others, they
must be clearly stated. A solid nursing knowledge base is vital to
this process because the rationale for interventions needs to be
sound  and  feasible  with  the  intention  of providing  effective
individualized care. The actions may be independent or collab-
orative and may encompass specific orders from nursing, medi-
cine, and  other  disciplines. Written  interventions  that  guide
ongoing client care need to be dated and signed. To facilitate the
planning  process, specific  nursing  priorities  have  been  identi-
fied  in  this  text  to  provide  a  general  ranking  of interventions.
This  ranking  would  be  altered  according  to  individual  client
situations. The seasoned practitioner may choose to use these as
broad-based  interventions. The  student  or  beginning  practi-
tioner  may  need  to  develop  a  more  detailed  plan  of care  by
including the appropriate interventions listed under each nurs-
ing  priority. Finally, as  each  client  usually  has  a  perception  of
individual needs or problems he or she faces and an expectation
of what could be done about the situation, the plan of care must
be congruent with the client’s reality or it will fail. N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E The plan of care documents client care in areas of accounta-
bility, quality assurance, and liability. The nurse needs to plan
care with the client, because both are accountable for that care
and for achieving the desired outcomes. Healthcare providers have a responsibility for planning with
the  client  and  family  for  continuation  of care  to  the  eventual
outcome  of an  optimal  state  of wellness  or  a  dignified  death.
Planning, setting goals, and choosing appropriate interventions
are essential to the construction of a plan of care as well as to
delivery  of quality  nursing  care. These  nursing  activities
comprise  the  planning  phase  of the  nursing  process  and  are
documented in the plan of care for a particular client. As a part
of the  client’s  permanent  record, the  plan  of care  not  only
provides  a  means  for  the  nurse  who  is  actively  caring  for  the
client to be aware of the client’s needs (NDs), goals, and actions
to be taken, but it also substantiates the care provided for review
by third-party payors and accreditation agencies, while meeting
legal requirements. A P P L I C AT I O N   O F   T H E   N U R S I N G   P R O C E S S Putting Theory into
Practice: Sample
Assessment Tools, Plan of
Care, and Documentation The client assessment is the foundation on which identifica-
tion of individual needs, responses, and problems is based. To
facilitate  the  steps  of assessment  and  diagnosis  in  the  nursing
process, an  assessment  tool  (Assessment  Tools  for  Choosing
Nursing  Diagnoses, Section  1)  has  been  constructed  using  a
nursing  focus  instead  of the  medical  approach  of “review  of
systems.” This  has  the  advantage  of identifying  and  validating
nursing diagnoses (NDs) as opposed to medical diagnoses. To achieve this nursing focus, we have grouped the NANDA
International  (formerly  the  North American  Nursing  Diagno-
sis  Association)  NDs  into  related  categories  titled  Diagnostic
Divisions  (Section  2), which  reflect  a  blending  of theories,
primarily Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and a self-care philoso-
phy. These divisions serve as the framework or outline for data
collection/clustering  that  focuses  attention  on  the  nurse’s
phenomena  of concern—the  human  responses  to  actual  and
potential  health  problems—and  directs  the  nurse  to  the  most
likely corresponding NDs. Because  the  divisions  are  based  on  human  responses  and
needs and not specific “systems,” information may be recorded
in more than one area. For this reason, the nurse is encouraged
to keep an open mind, to pursue all leads, and to collect as much
data as possible before choosing the ND label that best reflects
the client’s situation. For example, when the nurse identifies the
cue of restlessness in a client, the nurse may infer that the client
is  anxious, assuming  that  the  restlessness  is  psychologically
based  and  overlooking  the  possibility  that  it  is  physiologically
based. From the specific data recorded in the database, an individu-
alized client diagnostic statement can be formulated using the
problem, etiology, signs/symptoms (PES) format  to  accurately
represent  the  client’s  situation. For  example, the  diagnostic N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E statement  may  read, “deficient  Knowledge  regarding  diabetic
care, related  to  misinterpretation  of information  and/or  lack
of recall, evidenced  by  inaccurate  follow-through  of instruc-
tions  and  failure  to  recognize  signs  and  symptoms  of hyper-
glycemia.” Desired  client  outcomes  are  identified  to  facilitate  choosing
appropriate  interventions  and  to  serve  as  evaluators  of both
nursing care and client response. These outcomes also form the
framework for documentation. Interventions are designed to specify the action of the nurse,
the  client, and/or  SOs. Interventions  need  to  promote  the
client’s  movement  toward  health/independence  in  addition  to
achievement of physiologic stability. This requires involvement
of the client in his or her own care, including participation in
decisions about care activities and projected outcomes. Section  3, “Client  Situation  and  Prototype  Plan  of Care,”
contains a sample plan of care formulated on data collected in
the nursing model assessment tool. Individualized client diag-
nostic  statements  and  desired  client  outcomes  (with  timelines
added  to  reflect  anticipated  length  of stay  and  individual
client/nurse  expectations)  have  been  identified. Interventions
have  been  chosen  based  on  concerns/needs  identified  by  the
client and nurse during data collection, as well as by physician
orders. Although  not  normally  included  in  a  written  plan  of care,
rationales  are  included  in  this  sample  for  the  purpose  of
explaining or clarifying the choice of interventions to enhance
the nurse’s learning. Finally, to  complete  the  learning  experience, samples  of
documentation  based  on  the  client  situation  are  presented  in
Section  4, “Documentation  Techniques.” The  plan  of care
provides documentation of the planning process and serves as a
framework/outline  for  charting  of administered  care. The
primary nurse needs to periodically review the client’s progress
and  the  effectiveness  of the  treatment  plan. Persons  then  are
able to read the notes and have a clear picture of what occurred
with the client in order to make appropriate judgments regard-
ing  client  management. The  best  way  to  ensure  the  clarity  of
progress  notes  is  through  the  use  of descriptive  (or  observa-
tional)  statements. Observations  of client  behavior  and
response  to  therapy  provide  invaluable  information. Through
this communication, it can be determined if the client’s current
desired  outcomes  or  interventions  need  to  be  eliminated  or
altered  and  if the  development  of new  outcomes  or  interven-
tions is warranted. Progress notes are an integral component of
the  overall  medical  record  and  should  include  all  significant
events  that  occur  in  the  daily  life  of the  client. They  reflect P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E implementation  of the  treatment  plan  and  document  that
appropriate  actions  have  been  carried  out, precautions  taken,
and  so  forth. It  is  important  that  both  the  implementation  of
interventions  and  progress  toward  the  desired  outcomes  be
documented. The notes need to be written in a clear and objec-
tive  fashion, specific  as  to  date  and  time, and  signed  by  the
person making the entry. Use of clear documentation helps the nurse to individualize
client  care. Providing  a  picture  of what  has  happened  and  is
happening  promotes  continuity  of care  and  facilitates  evalua-
tion. This reinforces each person’s accountability and responsi-
bility  for  using  nursing  process  to  provide  individually
appropriate and cost-effective client care. N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E This is a suggested guide/tool to create a database reflecting a
nursing focus. Although the Diagnostic Divisions are alphabet-
ized  here  for  ease  of presentation, they  can  be  prioritized  or
rearranged in any manner to meet individual needs. In addition,
the assessment tool can be adapted to meet the needs of specific
client  populations. Excerpts  of assessment  tools  adapted  for
psychiatric and obstetric settings are included at the end of this
section. P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Observed response to activity: Cardiovascular:
Respiratory:
Mental status (i.e., withdrawn/lethargic)
Neuro/muscular assessment: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Capillary refill:
Homans’ sign:
Nail abnormalities:
Distribution/quality of hair:
Trophic skin changes: Stress factors:
Ways of handling stress:
Financial concerns:
Relationship status:
Cultural factors/ethnic ties:
Religion:
Lifestyle:
Sense of connectedness/harmony with self:
Feelings of: Helplessness: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Usual bowel pattern:
Laxative use:
Character of stool:
Diarrhea:
History of bleeding:
Usual voiding pattern:
Incontinence/when:
Frequency: Usual diet (type):
Cultural/religious restrictions:
Carbohydrate/protein/fat intake: g/d
Vitamin/food supplement use:
Food preferences:
No. of meals daily:
Dietary pattern/content: B:
Last meal/intake:
Loss of appetite:
Heartburn/indigestion: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Jugular vein distention:
Thyroid enlarged:
Condition of teeth/gums:
Appearance of tongue:
Mucous membranes: Fainting spells/dizziness:
Headaches: Location:
Tingling/numbness/weakness (location):
Stroke/brain injury (residual effects):
Seizures: Type: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Memory: Recent:
Glasses:
Pupil: Shape:
Facial droop:
Handgrasp/release, R/L:
Posturing:
Deep tendon reflexes: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Respiratory: Rate:
Use of accessory muscles:
Fremitus:
Breath sounds:
Cyanosis:
Sputum characteristics:
Mentation/restlessness: Allergies/sensitivity:
Exposure to infectious diseases:
Immunization history:
Previous alteration of immune system: Geographic areas lived in/visited:
Seat belt/helmet use:
Workplace safety/health issues:
History of accidental injuries: Fractures/dislocations:
Arthritis/unstable joints:
Back problems:
Changes in moles:
Delayed healing:
Cognitive limitations: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Sexually active:
Birth control method:
Sexual concerns/difficulties:
Recent change in frequency/interest: Bleeding between periods:
Menopause:
Vaginal discharge:
Surgeries:
Hormonal therapy/calcium use:
Practices breast self-examination:
Last mammogram: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Role within family structure:
Perception of relationships with family members:
Feelings of: Mistrust: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Special healthcare concerns (e.g., impact of religious/
cultural practices):
Health goals:
Familial risk factors (indicate relationship): Use of herbal supplements (specify):
Admitting diagnosis per provider:
Reason per client:
History of current complaint:
Client expectations of this hospitalization:
Previous illnesses and/or hospitalizations/surgeries:
Evidence of failure to improve:
Last complete physical examination: DRG-projected mean length of stay:
Date information obtained:
Anticipated date of discharge:
Resources available: Persons: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E What kind of person are you (positive/negative, etc.)?
What do you think of your body?
How would you rate your self-esteem (1–10 with Are you a nervous person?
Are your feelings easily hurt?
Report of stress factors:
Previous patterns of handling stress:
Financial concerns:
Relationship status:
Work history/military service:
Cultural factors:
Religion:
Lifestyle:
Significant losses/changes (date):
Stages of grief/manifestations of loss:
Feelings of: Helplessness: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Believe/feel you are another person:
Perception different than others:
Ability to follow directions: Mental status (note duration of change):
Oriented/disoriented: Time:
Place:
Check all that apply: speech (e.g., spontaneous/sudden silences):
Content:
Delusions:
Rate or flow:
Clear, logical progression:
Expression:
Flight of ideas:
Ability to concentrate: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E Type of previous delivery:
Health status of living children:
History of accidental injuries: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Client’s belief of when conception occurred:
Estimated date of delivery:
Practices breast self-examination (Y/N):
Last Pap smear:
Recent contraceptive method:
OB history (GPTPAL): Gravida: Delivery history: Year:
Length of gestation:
Type of delivery:
Born (alive or dead):
Weight: Vagina:
Uterus:
Diagonal conjugate:
Transverse diameter:
Shape of sacrum:
Coccyx:
Ischial spines:
Adequacy of inlet:
Mid: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E History of STD (date/type):
Month of first prenatal visit:
Previous/current obstetric problems/treatment: Length of time since last pregnancy:
Type of previous delivery:
Health status of living children:
Blood transfusion: P U T T I N G   T H E O R Y   I N T O   P R A C T I C E Method of auscultation:
Fundal height:
Activity/movement:
Fetal assessment testing (Y/N):
Date: N U R S E ’ S   P O C K E T   G U I D E